# 1. The SBOM Graph

Inside of protobom, all SBOM data is represented as a directed graph. This model
is a direct inheritance from `protobom` the universal I/O layer to work
with Software Bill of Materials data.

`bomshell` uses the sbom graph from `protobom`, the graph is modelled to capture
all data from SPDX 2.2+ and CycloneDX 1.4+ losslesly. This means that when
ingesting documents from these formats is preserved regardless of their origin.

The protobom model has four main elements: NodeLists, Nodes, Edges and a Document.
One important notion from protobom/bomshell that needs to be grasped early is:
When working with SBOM data, there may not always be a Document. Hopefully, by
the end of this tutorial it will become clear why. Let's go through all elements
to understand their roles.

## The `protobom` Building Blocks

### 1.1 Node

A node in the protobom model is the basic element of information. A node abstracts
packages and files from SPDX and components from CycloneDX. Nodes have properties
which capture the different bits of SBOM data such as Names, Hashes, Licenses, etc.

As their name implies, Nodes constitute the Nodes of the SBOM graph model. Ideally 
SBOMs will always be conected to other nodes or to the root of the Document.

### 1.2 Edges

Node are bound together by edges. Edges abstract the SPDX relationships and the
implicit links in the various links from the CycloneDX model (components tree,
dependency graph).

Edges in `protobom` are directed, they have one source and can have many
destinations. They are also typed, the types in protobom are losely based on the
SPDX relationship types. They are also designed to contain data. At the time
of writing, they don't have properties but they will soon.

### 1.3 NodeLists

The SBOM graph is contained within a NodeList. A node list is essentially a
data struct that contains:

- A list of Nodes
- A list of Edges
- A list of Root Nodes

The Root Nodes mark the entry point to the graph. NodeLists can exist independent
of a Document and are the mos frequent result of operations performed on the 
SBOM graph.

### 1.4 The Document

A document is just a thin container for a NodeList with some added metadata.
The document has two parts a NodeList and a Metadata struct that captures any
data not related to components when a file is read by protobom.

Any NodeList can be turned into a document. As all Documents have a built-in NodeList,
any operation that can be performed on a NodeList can also be performed on a document. 

