# 2. The `bomshell` Model

In essence, `bomshell` is a runtime that executes small CEL scripts or programs
we call "recipes". Recipes are statements that perform operations on SBOM data
and evaluate to a result. This result will often be a new SBOM (a Document in
protobom lingo). Expressions in protobom recipes can also evaluate to NodeLists
or even Nodes.

An invocation of protobom has three main tasks:

1. It sets some options, according to defaults and user preferences
2. Preloads one or more SBOMs into the bomshell environment (not required).
3. Reads a protobom recipe and executes it.

The results are output to STDOUT by default. The results format can be configured
by the user or an embedding application using the bomshell format.

## The `bomshell` Runtime Environment

When execution starts, the recipe logic runs in an environment that has
two predefined variables:

- A global `bomshell` object. This object houses the main functions that are not
methods of the SBOM data elements (Documents, Nodes, etc).
- A collection of SBOMs. Any SBOMs preloaded into the runtime environment are 
parsed and exposed in a global `sboms[]` list. The list is a numerical array
and documents are indexed in the order they were defined.

## Expression Evaluation

All `bomshell` functions return an SBOM data elements such as Documents or
NodeLists. En expression is said to `evaluate` as a result of the last function
called. If a function is called and it returns a Document, the CEL expression
evaluates to the Document.

The result of the evaluation will be output (to STDOUT by default). Documents
can be output as standard SPDX or CycloneDX documents. NodeLists can be extracted
in more data formats designed to work with data applications or converted to new
Documents.


