# 3. Invoking `bomshell`

There are three main ways to invoke bomshell. The regular `bomshell` command,
the stricter `bomshell run` subcommand, and as the interpreter of standalone
scripts.

To test the following commands, download protobom from our 
[releases page](https://github.com/chainguard-dev/bomshell/releases) or
build it from source for the most cutting edge experience :)

## The `bomshell` Command

There are two main ingredients of a bomshell invocation: the recipe and one or
more SBOMs to work on. When running `bomshell` from the command line, the tool
will try to make some smart assumptions to find the ingredients it needs.

### Finding The Recipe

In its normal mode, bomshell will try to find the recipe from a couple of places.
There is only one recipe in a bomshell invocation.

#### First Positional Argument

Forst there is the positional arguments it receives:

```
bomshell recipe.cel sbom1.spdx.json
```

When receiving a list of arguments, bomshell will check the first to see if it 
is a file with CEL code in it. If it is not a file, it will try to parse the 
contents of the first argument not as a file name but as the recipe code. This
lets you specify the recipe code in your terminal directly:

```
bomshell 'sbom.packages()' sbom1.cdx.json
```

There is one exception designed for convenience and UI consistency that override
this behavior. 

#### The `--execute` Flag

To avoid guess work parsing the first argument, the recipe code can be specified
in the command line using the `-e`|`--execute` flag:

```
bomshell --execute 'sbom.packages()' sbom1.spdx.json
```

When `-e` is set, all positional arguments will be interpreted as SBOMs to parse.

### Defining SBOMs to be Preloaded

The second ingredient of the `bomshell` invocation are the SBOMs that are parsed
and loaded into  the runtime environment. There are three ways to tell bomshell
where to find SBOMs to play with.

Regardless of how they were specified, the SBOMs follow the same journey into the
bomshell runtime environment: The files are opened, their content is read and 
the format is automatically detected. The data is parsed into a `protobom` document
and loaded into the SBOMs array in the runtime. Any SBOM that fails to load because
of I/O errors or parsing problems will cause the whole bomshell run to fail before
the recipe code is evaluated.

#### Positional Arguments

After the recipe code is found, any positional arguments remaining will be
interpreted as path names to SBOM files. As mentioned before the format is
automatically detected by the `protobom` core so no need to specify if files are
SPDX or CycloneDX documents or to have special file name conventions.

```
bomshell recipe.cel sbom1.spdx.json sbom2.cdx.json
```

To understand how positional arguments are interpreted, check the previous section
on finding the recipe.

#### The `--sbom` Flag

To ensure a consistent behavior that does not guess your intentions, you can
define the SBOMs to be loaded. Any number of SBOMs can be defined. The following
command is an equivalent to the previous example: 

```
bomshell recipe.cel --sbom=sbom1.spdx.json --sbom=sbom2.cdx.json
```

#### Piping an SBOM through STDIN

bomshell also supports piping an SBOM through STDIN. This is useful to chaing
`bomshell` to the result of another program that writes SBOMs such as generators
or downloading documents with curl:

```
cat mysbom.spdx.json | bomshell 'sbom.files()'
```

#### SBOM Order

All loaded SBOMs are loaded into a magic array that is exposed at runtime. The 
array is numeric and SBOMs are loaded in the way they were specified:

1. If an SBOM was loaded from STDIN it will always be `sbom[0]`
2. Next, positional arguments take precedent
3. Finally any sboms specified using the `--sbom` flag.

## The `bomshell run` Subcommand.

`bomshell` offers a more predictable `run` subcommand designed t be run in CI and
other automated environments. The run subcommand works almost like the default
`bomshell` invocation but it will not try to parse arguments to figure out if
a string is a file name or code to execute. This lets you have a consistent behavior
when it runs unsupervised.

## Standalone Scripts

The bomshell interpreter has an internal extension to the CEL parser to support 
scripts with a shebang line. This allows for scripts to be run directly, relying
on the OS to run the bomshell interpreter.

#### Example: `file-printer`

```shell
#!/usr/bin/env bash
sbom.files()
```

#### Execution:

```
file-printer
[... output trimmed ...]
```

