# 5. The language

The first chapter, The SBOM graph intruduced some key concepts of the bomshell
model. This section will put those concepts to work in more concrete examples.

Working in bomshell means interacting with the basic protobom constructs: Nodes,
Edges, Documents, etc. The CEL runtime in bomshell exposes all the public
properties of the objects, this means that they are accesible from the recipe
code. This expression evaluates to the document ID:

```
sbom.metadata.id
```

## Methods

The runtime environment defines a few global functions, the real work usually
happens on methods exposed by the `protobom` building blocks. For example, the
following recipe returns one node that has the identifier "MY-ID":

```
sbom.GetNodeByID("MY-ID")
```

`bomshell` operates on the assumption that functions return the basic protobom
constructs and they can be chained after another to query and remix SBOM data:

```
sbom.method1().method2().method3()
```

As mentioned in the _The bomshell Model_ chapter, expressions gnerally evaluate
to one of the protobom building blocks and their final result is output by
protobom. Let's look at an example finding packages and files.

## Finding Packages and Files

Both documents and NodeLists expose simple `.packages()` and `.files()` methods
that traverse their graphs and return a new `NodeList`` built exclusively with 
Nodes that match packages and files respectively. For example, the following
expression evaluates to a NodeList comprised of all packages in an SBOM:

```
sbom.packages()
```

The equivalent `.files()` method returns a NodeList with only those nodes of type
file:

```
sbom.files()
```

Depending on the `--nodelist-format` flag, the bomshell run will output the
resulting nodelist in a variety of formats.

### Converting NodeLists to Documents

At any point in the bomshell recipe, NodeLists can be transformed into a new Document:

```
sbom.packages().ToDocument()
```

In this case, the expression evaluates to a document that is created in the fly.
The output will depend on the `--document-format` setting: you can output a new
SPDX or CycloneDX document. Any format supported by the protobom backend can be
specified.

## More SBOM Queries

## Preloaded SBOMs

A note on preloaded SBOMs.

All files configured to be ingested are parsed and loaded into the magic
`sboms[]` collection. This numeric array holds all preloaded SBOMs in the order
they were specified. `sbom[0]` is the first one, `sbom[1]` is the second one and
so on.

The astute reader will have noticed that examples use the variable `sbom` instead
of `sbom[0]`. This is a convenience variable preloaded with the first specified
sbom. The contents of `sbom` and `sbom[0]` are pointers to the same protobom Document.

## The bomshell Variable

Global functions that are not methods of the protobom Documents and Nodes are
methods of the magic `bomshell` object. This global object is always created
when the recipe is executed.

At the time of writing the bomshell object only has one function: LoadSBOM().
This function reads a file and loads an SBOM into memory at runtime.

More details about the bomshell object will be filled into this chapter as
the runtime matures.
